Now we have hopefully a pretty good
intuition of what a pure function is and
how to recognize one, or how to
recognize a function that's not pure and
what some of those red
flags are to look for.
So now we wanna talk about
another technique in a functional
programmers toolbox, which is recursion.
And how it helps us avoid a more
imperative style of looping
through iteration.
So, okay, iteration and recursion,
we could think of as kind of two mini
paradigms that sort of go hand in
hand with imperative programming for
iteration and
functional programming for recursion.
So, iteration and recursion
are two ways of thinking about how
to get the computer to do the same
operation, lots of different times.
And in the iteration mini paradigm or
sub paradigm,
these don't usually get called paradigms,
but
I think that they are coz they're kind
of like ways of looking at the world.
In the iteration mini paradigm,
we think about that
repetition in terms of loops with for
or while usually.
And that loop as we go,
we're probably going to
be changing some variable
like a counter like I or
when you do like a for
let, element of array.
We're using this element variable, and
we're gonna be changing that as we go.
So that means we have some value changing
over time, which means that it's stateful.
And so when you have a really
complex iterative loop,
sometimes it can be hard to think about,
okay, what's the value of I right now?
Where am I in my loop?
Which loop am I on?
What are the values?
And so again, we have that general problem
of like it's hard to think about state.
It's hard to think about
values changing over time.
And so in the recursive mini paradigm,
we're gonna think about things
in a more pure functional way.
We're in recursion instead of using for
or while and
these stateful loops,
we're going to use self reference.
We're gonna have a function call
itself firma within itself.
So that we have kind of this
functional inception of self reference.
And that is how we're gonna
execute the same operation or
the same chunk of code multiple times.
Now what that means is that each call
of the function again, all I care
about is the input coming in, and
all I care about is the output going out.
So the idea is that we're no longer
changing those values over time.
We're getting rid of that state.
We've got a more stateless way of
repeating the code that we need to repeat.
So this is kind of the big picture of
the difference between the iteration
mode of getting code to execute
multiple times and recursion.
So as we said iteration doesn't
really go that nicely with functional
programming like we saw in that example
from our pure functions exercise where
we had an iterative loop that was
changing a table within our function.
So instead, when we're writing functional
code we're gonna move away from
iteration and
towards a more recursive mindset.
So let's take a look at some
iterative code right here.
I've got a sum function,
it takes in some array of numbers.
And then it's using a variable
called total with a for loop, so
that we're changing the value of total
each time we run through this for
loop, adding on numbers from the array.
And so
if I run this code on array of numbers,
I'm gonna get out some certain output.
And now again,
this might be a deterministic function
that always gives me the sum if I always
give it the same array of numbers.
But, again, that looping inside,
that changing of that value of total,
the fact that total can
have different values
over time through this code
is not super functional.
So let's make this even more
functional by making it recursive.
So now, we have a recursive sum function.
It's recursive because it
makes a call to itself.
So within the body of sum,
I'm actually calling sum as well.
That is a definition of
a recursive function.
Now in practice when you're
writing recursive functions,
you have to make sure you have
two parts to the function.
On the one hand, I have my recursive case.
So, in this recursive case,
I'm gonna be taking off the first
thing in my numbers array and
then, adding it to whatever
the result is of this same sum
operation on the rest of the array.
So I'm using slice here in JavaScript
to take the rest of the numbers in
the array after that first one.
And that is my recursion.
However, if I don't stop that recursion
at some point am just gonna keep
calling myself down and down and down and
down and down into an infinite loop and
it's gonna be like when Leonardo DiCaprio
in inception gets lost in the dream world.
If you haven't seen the movie, and you
wanna take a study break, it's pretty fun.
In any case, we don't want to get
lost in an infinite series of loops.
So we also need what's called a base case.
We need a non recursive case in
our function, which we can use if
to split that out where in the case
that I only have one number in my array,
I'm gonna stop recursion,
I'm not gonna do any recursive call, and
I'm just gonna return that number because
the sum of a single number is that number.
So when we're thinking about writing
recursive functions, this is what I want
everybody to remember is make sure
that you're writing a base case and
you might have more than one cases in
which you're not doing that recursion.
And then your recursive case,
don't forget that base case or
else you're gonna run into headaches.
And we'll take a look at later what
kind of headaches [LAUGH] those will be.
Questions?
Do we not run into problems when we have
really, really large arrays with lots and
lots of recursive calls
that are necessary?
Yes, we do.
We totally do.
And in a moment we're gonna talk about and
we're gonna see [LAUGH] maybe what
that problem is gonna look like.
And how we can solve it,
is a subject that's something we're
gonna talk super briefly about.
But I'm also gonna send you some
resources where you can find out
more about how you can get around that
problem in functional programming.
But great point, yes, there is an issue
here and if we're not quite sure what that
issue might be, the next exercise we're
gonna think about it a little harder.
>> I have a question about, I guess it's
just a [INAUDIBLE] functional calls.
Is it possible to, with your output
of data global value that maybe
you don't reference but
it's like we're building a database or
you're building some information
from a recursive call.
If during the call you're
updating a global variable,
global value or database does that
make it that is not pure function?
>> If during your recursive functions
execution and during the recursive calls,
you are updating something and
outside world like a database,
does that make it an impure function?
Is the question?
What does everybody think?
I see some thumbs up.
>> Yes.
>> I hear yes.
Yes.
Yes, exactly.
So again, none of the techniques that
we're gonna look at that are that are kind
of handy ways of thinking about
the practice the day to day of doing
functional programming.
None of these will replace the core
concept which is that we need purity,
we need determinism, we need to make
sure that we're avoiding side effects.
So this is all going to be kind of a yes
and yes, we need pure functions and we
can use recursion to help us avoid state
within those functions in iterative loops.
But we still don't want to
introduce non determinism or
introduce side effects into our code,
even if it's recursive.
So it is totally possible, and
in the world of JavaScript happens a lot
that you have a recursive
function that is not pure.
So recursion is not a condition of purity,
it is more a consequence of when
you're in a world where you have no
possibility of changing values over
time where you have no such concept
as state values changing over time.
That recursion ends up being useful for
that pure functional world.
If that makes sense.
Great.
Other questions?
Are recursive functions more
expensive than iterative functions?
That is a great question and
gets also at this question of are you
gonna run into performance or
other problems if you have really,
really big data that you're operating on?
And that is a whole really
interesting question that I
definitely wanna talk
about with all of us.
But I think it'll be great if we
can take a look at these exercises.
And part of the exercise is gonna be
actually thinking about that question.
What are the performance implications for
iteration versus for recursion?